.TH JRF 1 "2026-03-08" "jrf 0.1.1" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
jrf \- JSON filter with the power and speed of Ruby
.SH SYNOPSIS

.nf
jrf 'STAGE >> STAGE >> STAGE ...' < input.ndjson

# Extract
jrf '_["foo"]'

# Filter then extract
jrf 'select(_["x"] > 10) >> _["foo"]'

# Aggregate
jrf 'select(_["item"] == "Apple") >> sum(_["count"])'
jrf 'percentile(_["ttlb"], 0.50)'
jrf '_["msg"] >> reduce(nil) { |acc, v| acc ? "#{acc} #{v}" : v }'

# Flatten arrays into rows
jrf '_["items"] >> flat'

# Sort rows by key expression
jrf 'sort(_["at"]) >> _["id"]'
.fi


.SH WHY RUBY

No need to learn a new programming language! Just use Ruby to:
.IP \[bu] 2
write whatever filtering logic inside select(...)
.IP \[bu] 2
implement custom aggregation logic using reduce(...) { block }

In addition, jrf is extremely fast thanks to Ruby's JSON parser and the JIT.
In this workload/environment, a simple test shows over 3x boost compared to jq:

.nf
% time jq -s 'map(.tid) | min' < large.ldjson
327936
jq -s 'map(.tid) | min' < large.ldjson  4.90s user 0.46s system 99% cpu 5.395 total
% time jrf 'min(_["tid"])' < large.ldjson
327936
exe/jrf 'min(_["tid"])' < large.ldjson  1.37s user 0.15s system 99% cpu 1.531 total
.fi


.SH INPUT AND OUTPUT

.IP \[bu] 2
Input and output are NDJSON (one JSON value per line).
.IP \[bu] 2
Empty lines are skipped.
.IP \[bu] 2
Each non-empty line is parsed with JSON.parse.

.SH BUILT-IN FUNCTIONS

jrf processes the input using a multi-stage pipeline that is connected by top-level >>.

Within each stage, the current JSON value is available as _, and the following built-in functions are provided.

.SS "select(predicate)"

Filters rows. If predicate is true, the current value passes through; if false, the row is dropped.

.nf
jrf 'select(_["status"] == 200) >> _["path"]'
.fi


.SS "flat"

Expands an Array into multiple rows, one output row per element.

.nf
jrf '_["items"] >> flat'
.fi


.SS "group"
.SS "group(expr)"

Collects values into one Array. This is the opposite of flat.
group (without arguments) is shorthand for group(_), i.e., collect the current stage value as-is.
group(expr) first evaluates expr and collects that result instead.

.nf
jrf '_["id"] >> group'
jrf 'group(_["id"])'
.fi


.SS "average(expr)"

Computes the average value across rows.

.nf
jrf '_["latency"] >> average(_)'
.fi


.SS "min(expr)"

Computes the minimum value across rows.

.nf
jrf '_["latency"] >> min(_)'
.fi


.SS "max(expr)"

Computes the maximum value across rows.

.nf
jrf '_["latency"] >> max(_)'
.fi


.SS "stdev(expr)"

Computes the standard deviation across rows.

.nf
jrf '_["latency"] >> stdev(_)'
.fi


.SS "sum(expr)"

Computes the sum across rows.

.nf
jrf '_["price"] * _["unit"] >> sum(_)'
.fi


.SS "percentile(expr, 0.95)"
.SS "percentile(expr, [0.1, 0.5, 0.9])"

Computes percentiles for p in [0.0, 1.0].

If a scalar is given as a percentile, emits the value as a scalar.

If an array of percentiles is given, the output format is:
.nf
{"percentile": 0.1, "value": 38}
{"percentile": 0.5, "value": 123}
{"percentile": 0.9, "value": 469}
.fi


.SS "reduce(initial) { |acc, v| ... }"

Generic custom reducer API.
Most built-in aggregations are convenience wrappers around reduce, and many reshaping patterns can also be expressed with reduce.

.nf
jrf '_["msg"] >> reduce(nil) { |acc, v| acc ? "#{acc} #{v}" : v }'
jrf '_["count"] >> reduce(0) { |acc, v| acc + v }'
.fi


.SS "sort(key_expr)"
.SS "sort(key_expr) { |a, b| ... }"

Sorts rows.
With one argument, rows are sorted by key expression.
With a block, rows are sorted by custom comparator.

.nf
jrf 'sort(_["at"]) >> _["id"]'
jrf 'sort { |a, b| b["at"] <=> a["at"] } >> _["id"]'
.fi


.SH LICENSE

MIT
